adding `accelerate-deepspeed` blog (#388)
huggingface/blog: accelerate-deepspeed.md

thumbnail: /blog/assets/82_accelerate_deepspeed/deepspeed-thumbnail.png
---

<h1>Accelerate Large Model Training using DeepSpeed</h1>

<div class="blog-metadata">
    <small>Published May 2, 2022.</small>
    <a target="_blank" class="btn no-underline text-sm mb-5 font-sans" href="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/main/pytorch-fsdp.md">
        Update on GitHub
    </a>
</div>

<div class="author-card">
    <a href="/smangrul">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1638132956881-5fca176d1d7a08cb34d79d5d.jpeg?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>smangrul</code>
            <span class="fullname">Sourab Mangrulkar</span>
        </div>
    </a>
    <a href="/sgugger">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1593126474392-5ef50182b71947201082a4e5.jpeg?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>sgugger</code>
            <span class="fullname">Sylvain Gugger</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

> In this post we will look at how we can leverage **[Accelerate](https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate)** Library for training large models which enables users to leverage ZeRO features of **[DeeSpeed](https://www.deepspeed.ai)**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post we will look at how we can leverage the **[Accelerate](https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate)** library for training large models which enables users to leverage the ZeRO features of **[DeeSpeed](https://www.deepspeed.ai)**.
```

# Motivation 🤗

> **Tired of OOM errors while trying to train large models? We have got you covered. Large models are very performant [1] but difficult to train with the available hardware. To get the most of the available hardware for training large models one can leverage Data Parallelism using ZeRO - Zero Redundancy Optimizer [2]**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Tired of OOM errors while trying to train large models? We've got you covered. Large models are very performant [1] but difficult to train with the available hardware. To get the most of the available hardware for training large models one can leverage Data Parallelism using ZeRO - Zero Redundancy Optimizer [2]**. 
```

  --task_name "mrpc" \
  --ignore_mismatched_sizes \
  --max_length 128 \
  --per_device_train_batch_size 40 \
  --learning_rate 2e-5 \
  --num_train_epochs 3 \
  --output_dir "/tmp/mrpc/deepspeed_stage2/" \
  --with_tracking \
  --report_to "wandb" \
```

In our Single-Node Multi-GPU setup, the maximum batch size that DDP supports without OOM error is 8. In contrast, DeepSpeed Zero-Stage 2 enables batch size of 40 without running into OOM errors. Therefore, DeepSpeed enables to fit **5X** more data per GPU when compared to DDP. Below is the snapshot of the plots from wandb [run](https://wandb.ai/smangrul/DDP_vs_DeepSpeed_cls_task?workspace=user-smangrul) along with benchmarking table comparing DDP vs DeepSpeed. 

![Wandb Run](./assets/82_accelerate_deepspeed/cls_run.png)

---
| Method | Batch Size Max | Train time per epoch (seconds) | Eval time  per epoch (seconds) | F1 score | Accuracy |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| DDP (Distributed Data Parallel) | 8 | 103.57 | 2.04 | 0.931 | 0.904 |
| DeepSpeed ZeRO Stage 2 | **40** | **28.98** | **1.79** | **0.936** | **0.912** |

Table 1: Benchmarking DeepSpeed ZeRO Stage-2 on DeBERTa-XL (900M) model

---

> We observe ~**3.5X** speed up in training without any drop in perforamnce metrics, all this without changing any code. Yay! 🤗. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this bigger batch size, we observe ~**3.5X** speed up in total training time without any drop in perforamnce metrics, all this without changing any code. Yay! 🤗. 
```
(Just so people don't believe it's the training step that is faster.)

> To be able to tweak more options, you will need to use a DeepSpeed config file and minimal code changes. Next, We will see how to do this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to tweak more options, you will need to use a DeepSpeed config file and minimal code changes. Let's see how to do this.
```

> # Accelerate 🚀:  Leverage DeepSpeed Config file to tweak more options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Accelerate 🚀:  Leverage a DeepSpeed Config file to tweak more options
```

> First, We will look at the task of finetuning Sequence-to-Sequence model for training our own Chatbot. Specifically, we will finetune `facebook/blenderbot-400M-distill` on `smangrul/MuDoConv` (Multi-Domain Conversation) dataset. The dataset contains conversations from 10 different data sources convering personas, grouding in specific emotional contexts, goal-oriented (e.g., restaurant reservation) and general wikipedia topics (e.g, Cricket).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, We will look at the task of finetuning a sequence-to-sequence model for training our own Chatbot. Specifically, we will finetune `facebook/blenderbot-400M-distill` on the `smangrul/MuDoConv` (Multi-Domain Conversation) dataset. The dataset contains conversations from 10 different data sources covering personas, grounding in specific emotional contexts, goal-oriented (e.g., restaurant reservation) and general wikipedia topics (e.g, Cricket).
```
+ link to the dataset on the Hub!

> The code is available here [run_seq2seq_no_trainer.py](https://github.com/pacman100/accelerate-deepspeed-test/blob/main/src/modeling/run_seq2seq_no_trainer.py). Current pratice to effectively measure the `Engagingness` and `Humanness` of Chatbots is via Human evlauations which are expensive [6]. As such for this example, the metric being tracked is BLEU score which isn't ideal but conventional automatic metric for such tasks. One can adapt the code to train larger T5 models if you have access to GPUs that support `bfloat16` precision else you will run into `NaN` loss values. We will run a quick benchmark on `10000` train samples and `1000` eval samples as we are interested in DeepSpeed vs DDP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code is available here [run_seq2seq_no_trainer.py](https://github.com/pacman100/accelerate-deepspeed-test/blob/main/src/modeling/run_seq2seq_no_trainer.py). Current pratice to effectively measure the `Engagingness` and `Humanness` of Chatbots is via Human evlauations which are expensive [6]. As such for this example, the metric being tracked is BLEU score (which isn't ideal but is the conventional metric for such tasks). One can adapt the code to train larger T5 models if you have access to GPUs that support `bfloat16` precision else you will run into `NaN` loss values. We will run a quick benchmark on `10000` train samples and `1000` eval samples as we are interested in DeepSpeed vs DDP.
```

```json
{
    "fp16": {
        "enabled": "true",
        "loss_scale": 0,
        "loss_scale_window": 1000,
        "initial_scale_power": 15,
        "hysteresis": 2,
        "min_loss_scale": 1
    },
    "optimizer": {
        "type": "AdamW",
        "params": {
            "lr": "auto",
            "weight_decay": "auto",
            "torch_adam": true,
            "adam_w_mode": true
        }
    },
    "scheduler": {
        "type": "WarmupDecayLR",
        "params": {
            "warmup_min_lr": "auto",
            "warmup_max_lr": "auto",
            "warmup_num_steps": "auto",
            "total_num_steps": "auto"
        }
    },
    "zero_optimization": {
        "stage": 2,
        "allgather_partitions": true,
        "allgather_bucket_size": 2e8,
        "overlap_comm": true,
        "reduce_scatter": true,
        "reduce_bucket_size": 2e8,
        "contiguous_gradients": true
    },
    "gradient_accumulation_steps": 1,
    "gradient_clipping": "auto",
    "steps_per_print": 2000,
    "train_batch_size": "auto",
    "train_micro_batch_size_per_gpu": "auto",
    "wall_clock_breakdown": false
}
```

> To enable DeepSpeed ZeRO Stage-2 with above config, please run `accelerate config` and provide the config file path when asked. For more details, refer the 🤗 `accelerate` official documentation [DeepSpeed Config File](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/deepspeed#deepspeed-config-file).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable DeepSpeed ZeRO Stage-2 with above config, please run `accelerate config` and provide the config file path when asked. For more details, refer the 🤗 `accelerate` official documentation for [DeepSpeed Config File](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/deepspeed#deepspeed-config-file).
```

    --num_train_epochs 1 \
    --gradient_accumulation_steps 1 \
    --num_warmup_steps 100 \
    --output_dir "/tmp/deepspeed_zero_stage2_accelerate_test" \
    --seed 25 \
    --logging_steps 100 \
    --with_tracking \
    --report_to "wandb" \
    --report_name "blenderbot_400M_finetuning"
```

When using DeepSpeed config, if user has specified `optimizer` and `scheduler` in config, the user will have to use `accelerate.utils.DummyOptim` and `accelerate.utils.DummyScheduler`. Those are the only minor changes that the user has to do. Below we show an example of the minimal changes required when using DeepSpeed config:
```diff
- optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(optimizer_grouped_parameters, lr=args.learning_rate)
+ optimizer = accelerate.utils.DummyOptim(optimizer_grouped_parameters, lr=args.learning_rate)

- lr_scheduler = get_scheduler(
-            name=args.lr_scheduler_type,
-            optimizer=optimizer,
-            num_warmup_steps=args.num_warmup_steps,
-            num_training_steps=args.max_train_steps,
-        )

+ lr_scheduler = DummyScheduler(
+            optimizer, total_num_steps=args.max_train_steps, warmup_num_steps=args.num_warmup_steps

> +        )

Reviewer: Make sure the indentation is just 4 spaces here.

![Chatbot](./assets/82_accelerate_deepspeed/chatbot.png)

---
## CPU/Disk Offloading to enable training humongous models that won’t fit the GPU memory

On a single 24GB NVIDIA Titan RTX GPU, one cannot train GPT-XL Model (1.5B parameters) even with a batch size of 1. We will look at how we can use DeepSpeed ZeRO Stage-3 with CPU offloading of optimizer states, gradients and parameters to train GPT-XL Model. 

> We will leverage the DeepSpeed Zero Stage-3 CPU offload config [zero3_offload_config_accelerate.json](https://github.com/pacman100/accelerate-deepspeed-test/blob/main/src/modeling/configs/zero3_offload_config_accelerate.json) (given below) For training. The rest of the process of using the config with 🤗 `accelrate` is similar to above experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will leverage the DeepSpeed Zero Stage-3 CPU offload config [zero3_offload_config_accelerate.json](https://github.com/pacman100/accelerate-deepspeed-test/blob/main/src/modeling/configs/zero3_offload_config_accelerate.json) (given below) for training. The rest of the process of using the config with 🤗 `accelerate` is similar to the above experiment.
```
